Add transform section (#59)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/transform.md

## Variable Transformations

```{=comment}
manipulate variables
DataFrames.transform
Ifelse and case_when
```

In @sec:filter, we saw that `filter` works by taking one or more source columns and filtering it by applying a function.
In other words, we saw that `source => f::Function` like in, for example, `filter(:name => name -> name == "Alice", df)`.
In @sec:select, we saw that `select` can take one or more source columns and put it into one or more target columns `source => target` like in, for example, `select(df, :name => :people_names)`.
In this section, we discuss how to **transform** variables, that is, how to modify data.
This goes via `source => transformation => target`.

As a generous example, given the `grades_2020` dataset:

```jl
@sco process=without_caption_label grades_2020()
```

> we can increase all the grades in `grades_2020`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we can increase all the grades in `grades_2020` by 1:
```

```jl
s = """
    plus_one(grades) = grades .+ 1
    transform(grades_2020(), :grade_2020 => plus_one)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

Here, the `plus_one` function receives the whole `:grade_2020` row and not just one element as one might expect.
That is the reason why we've added the dot before the plus symbol.

> The dot, in Julia's syntax, means broadcasting and allows Julia to add one to all the elements in `grades`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dot`, in Julia's syntax, means broadcasting and allows Julia to add one to all the elements in `grades`.
```

For instance:

```jl
sco("[1, 2, 3] .+ 1")
```

> Like said above, the `DataFrames.jl` minilanguage talks is `source => transformation => target`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like said above, the `DataFrames.jl` minilanguage talk is `source => transformation => target`.
```

## Variable Transformations

```{=comment}
Ifelse and case_when
```

In @sec:filter, we saw that `filter` works by taking one or more source columns and filtering it by applying a function.
In other words, we saw that `source => f::Function` like in, for example, `filter(:name => name -> name == "Alice", df)`.
In @sec:select, we saw that `select` can take one or more source columns and put it into one or more target columns `source => target` like in, for example, `select(df, :name => :people_names)`.
In this section, we discuss how to **transform** variables, that is, how to modify data.
This goes via `source => transformation => target`.

As a generous example, given the `grades_2020` dataset:

```jl
@sco process=without_caption_label grades_2020()
```

we can increase all the grades in `grades_2020` by 1:

```jl
s = """
    plus_one(grades) = grades .+ 1
    transform(grades_2020(), :grade_2020 => plus_one)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

> Here, the `plus_one` function receives the whole `:grade_2020` row and not just one element as one might expect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, the `plus_one` function receives the whole `:grade_2020` column and not just one element as one might expect.
```

I think is column right?

> That is the reason why we've added the dot before the plus symbol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is the reason why we've added the broadcasting "dot" `.` before the plus symbol.
```

Back in Julia 101 I've used the following phrasing:
> familiar broadcasting "dot" operator `.`

> The `dot`, in Julia's syntax, means broadcasting and allows Julia to add one to all the elements in `grades`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `.`, in Julia's syntax, means broadcasting and allows Julia to add one to all the elements in `grades`.
```

For instance:

```jl
sco("[1, 2, 3] .+ 1")
```

Like said above, the `DataFrames.jl` minilanguage is `source => transformation => target`.

> So, if we want to have only one column in the output, we can do:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, if we want to keep the naming of the `target` column in the output, we can do:
```

I think it's easier to say that if "we want to keep the naming of the target column".

Because the example before without the `=> target` works fine also.

Also you'll probably need to cover

```julia
transform(df, ...; renamecols=false)
```

which I use a lot.

```jl
s = """
    transform(grades_2020(), :grade_2020 => plus_one => :grade_2020)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

> The same thing can also be written with `select` as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The same transformation can also be written with `select` as follows:
```

or operation, or anything else besides "thing" 😄

```jl
s = """
    select(grades_2020(), :, :grade_2020 => plus_one => :grade_2020)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

where the `:` means "select all the columns" as described in @sec:select.

> Alternatively, it can be written by using Julia's broadcasting and modify column `grade_2020` by using `df.grade_2020`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, it can be written by using Julia's broadcasting and modify column `grade_2020` by acessing the column with `df.grade_2020`:
```

```jl
s = """
    df = grades_2020()
    df.grade_2020 = plus_one.(df.grade_2020)
    df
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

> But, although the last example is easier since it builds on more native Julia operations, we would advise to use the functions provided by `DataFrames.jl` in most cases.

Reviewer 2: Why we would advise that?

I know why but our reader doesn't know and this is kinda of hand-waving argument...

> To show how to process two columns at the same time we take the left joined data from @sec:join:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To show how to transform two columns at the same time, we use the left joined data from @sec:join:
```

I think that is better to use transform than process since this is the name of the section.

```jl
s = """
    leftjoined = leftjoin(grades_2020(), grades_2021(); on=:name)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

> With this, we can add a column saying whether someone passed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this, we can add a column saying whether someone was approved:
```

passed is too ambiguous
